I'm not necessarily any expert on it, and it doesn't have anything to do with my general field, but I think it's interesting is when you look at the whole history of Book Collective and what people could get out of it in terms of building great libraries and so on, it's really been shrinking, the opportunities.
You know, you looked at what Arthur Houghton did for Harvard, and you got a library, and then you look at what Mary Hyde put in, and she got a suite for a hell of a lot more money, and probably a much better donation in terms of the quality and so on.
There are a lot of opportunities out there, but it is very much a shrinking thing.
And when you look at what... Shrinking opportunities.
You mean in terms of material that's available?
Right.
In terms of building this kind of library, really shrinking.
And people generally not doing it.
Humanities Research Center down there was... People criticized it at the time for the way they did it.
I'm doing a chapter on this, by the way.
I don't want to be naive about this.
This is one of the reasons I'm here today, too, because I...
I don't mean to interrupt, but I want to be honest with you, too.
I understand you have some feelings about how they did it at the beginning.
Go ahead.
Well, I think that I was no part of it.
I was a small dealer, and I went to see Warren Roberts.
Who I interviewed, by the way.
Oh, I don't know.
We're not talking maybe like mid-'60s, something like that.
I interviewed him three weeks ago in Texas.
And he told me that they really just couldn't be bothered doing small dealers.
and uh they really they dealt with one dealer yeah yeah if i wanted to sell them anything i should sell it to lou feldman and they would think about that what is that what were your feelings about that obviously i didn't like it uh did you suspect anything improper no i i mean whether improper is that you've got public money uh and and how it's how it's being
Ron Roberts suggested that you sell to Lou Feldman?
Yeah.
Well, just because he said he couldn't be bothered, you know, looking at all these small offers from small dealers.
That he just didn't have the time for that, that it really had to filter through one person, and Lou Feldman was their agent.
He also said at the time that their financing was a real problem, and that they were like a couple of years behind.
You know that Lou gave him credit.
Yeah, and that if I sold stuff to Feldman, Feldman could pay me, and then Feldman would wait for the money.
So there was merit to it.
I don't know, you know, behind the scenes at all.
I have no knowledge.
And I'm not, by the way, I can say this straight out, I'm not alleging any criminal wrongdoing there.
I've looked hard, and I'll be very honest with you, but it's a hell of a story.
Yeah, I mean, it was the way it was done, and I think also Texas created a lot of animosity because Feldman was not a popular character.
Charles Hamilton, who I spoke with Monday.
Did you ever read the indictment he wrote?
Oh, I did, yeah.
Hamilton shoots his mouth.
All right.
Now, I confronted him on this.
Now, let's say with the tape, because it's on tape.
He wrote this in 1981.
And if these people were alive, they would have such a libel suit against him.
I mean, what he alleged was, I don't know if you recall it, he didn't even allege it.
He said it, yeah.
That Ransom and Feldman got together.
They bought worthless junk at low prices and sold them to the University of Texas, and they both died millionaires as a result of the money that they stole from the University of Texas.
Now, that's crazy.
And I asked him, point blank, Monday, nice guy, by the way, but Hamilton Blash.
Great interview.
He didn't even want to kind of, I mean, I finally had a, this never happens, normally I'll stick with people the way they want to go.
I said, I'm really interested in this, in the source of this information.
I said, you don't cite any facts.
You don't say what they bought for how much.
And I said, what's your source for this?
How do you know this?
And he said, now this, I appreciate you keep this to yourself for the moment.
He said, well, I'm very friendly with Luke Goldman's secretary.
And I said, could you give me his or her name?
And he said, no, she's with Rec Moose now, and she won't talk.
And I said, well, she has made some very serious charges.
I think that they should be, you know, if they're true, let's put them on the record.
If they're not, anyway, he said he's going to talk to the woman, maybe the woman will talk to me.
But that's the source for that indictment.
But that was a feeling that people had, because Luke Feldman was the exclusive agent for Texas, that a lot of other legitimate dealers like yourself were kind of shut out.
Yeah.
And, well, they also bought from Francis Himmel at Himmel and Barker, and Margie Cohn,
House of Books in New York.
All these people are dead now.
Terry Tanner runs Hamill and Barker, and he worked for the girls, they were called.
Hamill and Barker were two women.
He worked for them.
They were the girls.
I thought Rostenberg and Stern were the girls.
These are the Chicago girls.
Hamill and Barker.
They're dead?
They're both dead, yeah.
And Terry Tanner is...
worked for them and now runs the business.
Where is he?
In Chicago, Evanston, actually.
I've been going to Chicago.
Evanston, Illinois.
Okay.
And I'd call him and see if, you know, if he's got it.
And he might have no knowledge of any of this stuff.
You never know.
From those days.
This is called networking here.
See, I mean, there's a lot of sense to some of this.
Now, I mean, you look, I've got a, I have a very big client.
I just want to make sure we're going.
Who filters anything he buys from other dealers through me.
Okay.
And I mean, in terms of just giving him advice, we take care of all his cataloging.
We do all his research.
He likes our standard of research.
So if you buy something from an auction house, he sends it to us.
We all have it deacidified.
We make cases for him.
We take care of his whole collection.
That can make sense.
We offer a lot of service.
I would think that the other side of this is you've got Feldman who could finance what they were doing.
You've got Feldman.
who could go out and, I don't know, go to the Powys family in England, make them a cash offer on the spot, may not get paid for two years, maybe triples his money.
But I don't think there was really anybody else who could pull it all together.
And look what they did.
Yeah.
That's the key thing.
In the end, and I remember sitting in somebody's office, probably with Deckard.
I think it was with Deckard Turner.
He's a tough big one guy.
He's something.
If you could get him.
Well, I think I can.
I mean, he makes a wonderful statement.
He's like Hamilton, you know.
Well, except that he's accurate.
But in the end, Decker told me that he'd been going over what they spent in Carlton Lake.
And over what they've been spending.
They spent $21 million and $22 million.
Look what they got.
In the end, nobody's... You mean that's all they spent?
Oh, whatever they spent.
One period of time, he was telling me.
But in the end, they got a fantastic opportunity.
It'll never happen again.
Okay.
Never happened again.
And if they overpaid for some stuff, so what?
I think that a lot of what went on was that Feldman was not a popular person.
He wasn't a pleasant person.
He was pretty obnoxious.
It's true.
Everything that people tell me is pretty consistent.
Yeah, I mean, you look even at his catalogs.
One of his catalogs, and this was all stuff that he had sold for Texas, and he listed it all in the catalog.
But at the end of the catalog, the last page says the total value of everything in this catalog.
1.9 million.
Yeah, and then he had, and his ads always used to say quality.
Which Hamilton said, and it's almost anti-Semitic, by the way.
I mean, he said, my wife, Diane, wonders if this was, if he was trying to be classy or if he was saying quality with the English accent, you know.
He said that in print, you know?
Oh, another guy you had to talk to then is, you know, I didn't think of this as Feldman's assistant is around, Bart Auerbach.
He worked for film for years.
Bart?
Auerbach.
A-U-R-B-A-C-A.
And in red, huh?
Is he in New York, you think?
Yeah, you reach him through Christie's book department.
He's a special consultant to Christie's.
That's worth the whole trip, right?
Yeah.
I mean, he worked for, he worked for, he didn't like him much.
I wonder if he's the source.
I don't, I don't think the source is accurate, honestly.
No, no, because that's, there's nothing.
Listen, I'm.
Hamilton, Hamilton, uh, it's just, shut the fuck up.
Yeah.
Oh, yeah.
I mean, I have to think about something.
I think that they... We're talking why people?
Yeah, I think that they could get to the point where there's nothing else to add, and they're not really enjoying it anymore.
That the pursuit is an important part of it, and the putting it together.
And having a stagnant collection doesn't appeal to a lot of people.
Paul Richards, a colleague of yours, as a collector, and he's that way.
He said, for him, it's just getting it.
And once he has it, he loses interest in it, and then he gives it to Fawcett University, I guess.
Yeah, he's given two collections.
You're a collector, too, right?
Yeah.
I really like this stuff.
That's important.
In books, I don't know if it applies to autographs and manuscript stuff, but you generally, you think twice about, no, I'm phrasing this wrong.
A lot of dealers don't collect themselves.
It's a stat with a statement, because maybe some clients think, well, help.
he's keeping the best stuff for himself.
Do you ever run into that?
Oh, yeah.
Into that kind of perception?
I do not show many collectors my collection.
They don't even know it exists.
And that's important.
Absolutely.
Because you can show people stuff that they can't have, and what you can't have is always more desirable than what you can have.
They feel that you're in competition in a particular area, and they're never going to buy anything great from you.
To even become more cynical, they might think that
you're going to drive the price up, too, because, well, I mean, Rosenbach used to say, well, if you don't buy it, I'll keep it for myself.
In other words, make the price so dear that they won't buy it, so that you can keep it.
But I never offered the stuff.
Would you like it?
I caught World War II.
That's a very active election.
Everything.
I mean, I caught every kind of propaganda issued by everybody.
Why?
It interests me tremendously,
how average decent people dealt with the world at war, with the fact that you had to go kill people or be killed, or that you were being bombed.
I mean, psychologically, how did people deal with this and still stay, you know, decent people?
And that's how the whole thing started.
I started collecting World War II propaganda posts.
Did you see Carl Russell's book, his recent book?
No, I don't think so.
Oh, Jesus, the book on World War II, and it was all about propaganda.
It's from Oxford University Press.
I'll send you a title.
It's all about this, I mean, perception.
Really?
What people said and what people said.
Oh, I would really appreciate that.
It was just published a couple months ago.
I did an interview with him.
No, I've not seen that.
Just write it down here.
I would appreciate that.
Yeah.
And I've got a huge collection of all the different kinds of propaganda issued during the war.
All kinds of black propaganda.
The hateful stuff.
I'm thinking of a chapter on this.
Who collects the hateful stuff?
Not because you agree with it in any way.
You may even be appalled by it.
I'm sure you are in many instances.
But to collect it also, not only because it interests you, but because it has to be preserved.
I think of the, I refer to the Lessing Rosenwald purchase of the Simon of Trent document, which he said that's the only case in his, time in his life he told Rosenbach, price is no object.
But he bought it because he didn't want it to stay in the hands of the Nazis
because they would misuse it.
It was about the sacrificial killing of children by Jews back in the 30s, very, very anti-Semitic.
He beat out the Nazis, and he gave it to the historical center here in Waltham, and they sold it.
He wanted them to keep it forever, so it was a little bit of a scandal.
Remember that case two or three years ago?
It sold for $165,000 and finally went to Yeshiva.
But my point is,
The true collector doesn't just acquire.
The true collector also is instrumental in preserving the product of human thought.
That's a lofty statement, but that is a thought that goes through my book.
Well, this very much goes through my whole World War II collection.
I mean, for one thing, nobody else has collected this, and no one else has collected it on the scale that I've collected it.
It's never interesting to me now.
I mean, I just bought the other day a complete run of the picture post,
which is like the Life magazine of London.
How about Nazi stuff?
I don't have much.
I have Nazi leaflets dropped on Allied soldiers, lots of that kind of stuff, if I can find it.
I mean, I buy all the German propaganda stuff, but not stuff from the 30s, not so much the political stuff of the Nazis, as much as just what they used during the war.
And in terms of autograph material, there's not a lot of good stuff around, but I have a lot of good stuff.
I mean, I have
I have Eisenhower's letter to his wife, written on June 9th, about how the landings are not.
And then one of the most incredible coincidences ever, I have Rommel's letter to his wife on the same day.
Jesus.
The same day.
Where did you find these?
Two completely different on each coast.
One on each coast.
Really?
I'm telling a guy in Los Angeles, I bought this Eisenhower letter from my... He reaches in his desk drawer and takes out the Rommel letter.
So you had to have it.
Yeah, I couldn't believe it.
The price went up, I'll bet, instantly.
I'm not sure.
It's a high price.
But I mean, it's just fantastic.
You pay a premium when you betray your hand, aren't you?
Well, you never expect anybody to come up with something like that.
I've got a lot of very, very great manuscript material from World War II.
But the concept is, there is a real concept here that this is a subject that nobody has collected.
It's a real ground floor kind of collection.
I mean, I set the tone and everything else, but what I collect, I'm not interested in memoirs.
I don't collect stuff written after.
I'm more interested in the ephemera that nobody has saved, not books, but the pamphlets, what to do when your house is bombed, all the blitzkrieg kind of stuff.
Well, this whole box, this is just, I have an agent in England who works for me, go to flea markets, give an idea of...
I honestly don't know what the hell this stuff is.
This is a box full of stuff that just came in yesterday, and it just buys all kinds of stuff.
At what point do you know what stuff you're going to sell and what you're going to keep?
I don't have any plans of selling any of it.
Okay.
German Submarine, 1939.
This is all, presumably all English.
National Baghdad to Beirut, 1944.
So there'll be more propaganda on how well they've been fighting patrols.
These are silk map shoes by some pilots that went down.
Phrase books, 1941, German phrase books.
This just came in?
Yeah, just this stuff just arrived yesterday.
Did you like it?
Oh, it's fascinating.
I mean, so you're pleased with this stuff.
Oh, yeah.
I mean, this stuff.
You like this stuff.
I haven't gone through this.
This I take home.
You're going through this now for the first time?
Yeah.
Map reading for the home guard.
A lot of home guard stuff interests me.
You've got a bunch of old people trying to defend English from an invasion.
It's unbelievable what they do.
You know how much fun my project is, I have to say this with the machine running, because just three weeks ago today, under similar circumstances, I was in Princeton, New Jersey with Bill Scheide.
You know, Mr. William Scheide?
Oh, yeah, yeah.
And it was just he and I, and he goes over and takes out a table, not unlike this, and he takes out his Gutenberg Bible, and he says, here, feel it.
But he was showing the same enthusiasm.
And this, again, is the collective, the collective.
He has this, regardless of what the, you know, the Goodwood Bible is not available to anyone else, but this is.
So I think there's a difference.
I mean, I can see the difference of a Paul, Paul Rich's, right, don't from the beginning.
And Paul, he is the kind of guy who gets it and then loses interest.
And that it is the putting together.
I like, I mean, I'm enjoying putting together.
I have a Western collection that's very stagnant now, of books, as well as manuscript material, that I wouldn't consider getting rid of, but I don't add to it.
I don't find manuscripts anymore, Western manuscripts, that are significant enough to add.
And books at this stage in the Western field, I'm actually one of the odd people who actually reads these books.
The shoot collector knows his collection.
That's another thesis of mine.
I'm not interested in the false collector.
I mean, I took a whole bunch of Overland journals, manuscript journals, as well as the guidebooks of the Overland Trail.
I drove the Oregon Trail one summer.
That was incredible.
And I bet you know where to lay your hands on everything, too.
I mean, you don't need to catalog, I mean, I'm sure you catalog it.
Yeah, but I mean, yeah, I mean, I know the stuff, you know.
But I mean, I thought it was fabulous to take this stuff and to start in Independence, Missouri, and drive to the Oregon Trail with the guidebooks and reading the descriptions and, you know, and here's this journal I've had of this guy and where he camped out and what they did.
It's fantastic.
I mean, like, the high point was a guy and his family had his journal in Kansas.
They carved their name on a rock, and the rock was there.
No kidding.
This does give you a sense of communing with history.
Yeah.
I think part of the kick out of collecting is... There are two kinds of collectors.
There's the collector, more than two, but there are certainly two major kinds.
The guy who is checking stuff off, who is putting sets together, who is gathering stuff, in part for the sake of gathering it.
The accumulator.
Yeah, I wouldn't want to...
Well, we're not talking about anybody in particular.
There are people who are accumulators.
Thomas Phillips was an accumulator.
And then I think there are people where the collection's a real living collection.
And it's just not filling shelves.
It's just not a matter of accomplishing, assembling the collection.
A guy's a very big client of mine who buys on large scale.
And he told me one time that he had just spent the weekend just while he was home alone for the weekend.
It was in an enormous house.
And he has framed autographs that tell every place.
He said it was like walking through history.
I mean, he gave me, I felt like saying, my God, I wish I could tape record this.
I mean, this is the most, I mean, he said it was the most unbelievable experience at how much he enjoys this collection, how much he gets out of it.
That's what I love in collectors.
You know, people that it's really living, active.
By the way, tell me, we can pick up again on this another time.
In fact, I think we're going to have to.
Yeah, I think it's really worthwhile.
I'll stay the quarter to 12.
I'll say another half hour is it.
Well, that's fine.
I don't want to push it.
No, that's okay.
I can push it off.
And some of these articles that I read, which are very good, by the way, you mentioned somebody on the West Coast, a major collection down in La Jolla.
David Carpels?
Yeah, he's in Santa Barbara.
Santa Barbara.
Is this somebody I should see, do you think?
Yeah, he is the biggest manuscript collector.
Well, he's one of the biggest, but he's the most publicly the biggest.
And he'd be really worth my while.
I don't know.
I think you ought to try talking on the telephone.
He's so cagey with dealers that I don't know what you get out of him.
Before I started mentioning him to people, I asked if it was all right to mention him.
He said okay, right?
Yeah, he did.
And it was funny, because I ran into his wife in Los Angeles right after the Town & Country thing came out.
And she said, oh, you know, thank you.
She said, and she said, Dave was so embarrassed, you know, that, I mean, you said anything about his mansion.
I said, you know, I said, come on, Masha.
I said, my God, I said, your house is absolutely unbelievable.
Oh, I know it's a mansion.
But he really doesn't appreciate that it's a mansion.
Well, what's the source of the income?
Real estate.
But they have a library, too, apparently.
Yeah, he bought the estate across the street.
And it's a library that's open to scholars?
Yeah.
I mean, it's open at the will of Dave Coppolis, I think.
Is he Greek?
No, I'm Greek.
I don't know.
I'm just curious.
I'm just looking for a way.
I haven't gone out to the West Coast.
I know he's got Bill Self.
You know who he is?
William Self.
Yeah, he's an old line collector.
Do you think the difference, what you'd find, I would bet, really, in talking, and I'm not knocking Bill South.
I mean, I know him.
I just met him for 10 minutes.
Yeah, he knows me.
I know him.
And I was impressed that he flew east to buy the Tamerlane, you know.
Yeah.
I like that.
I kind of like that.
Yeah.
But I think that a lot of those guys, you might find, are who will tell you that the reason that they want something is because it's rare, because it's a first.
Well, it's a high spot.
Yeah.
Dave Karpolis, where he's collecting manuscript material, has to make individual decisions on everything.
And he'll tell you that he bought this because politically this thought, you know, resulted in all this, you know, kind of stuff.
I think you get, generally with manuscript collectors, since the criteria are very different, you're not just collecting sets, you're not just, you know, unique items.
Yeah, and so they have to make, you have to make unique decisions.
You have to make a decision in each case.
as to what you're going to buy.
I think that you'd find... I don't have a lot of empathy for the guys watching high spots.
I mean, it just doesn't turn me on.
Like Dick Manning.
You know Dick Manning?
Yeah.
I had a good Dick last week.
Interesting guy.
Yeah.
I mean, you know, he should do what he wants for this money.
He's been collecting for seven years.
He started collecting because he always had this vision of a class of life.
It started from the other way.
I've never seen it.
He wanted the library first, and then the items to fill it.
Very interesting, isn't it?
And he watched this and that, and Jane Fiverr, and the Shakespeare's.
Two million dollars is a lot of money for that.
Two million he paid.
I got the Tamerlane for 200, but for my purposes, he's excellent.
Oh, yeah, yeah.
Because he hasn't been written in love.
He's brand new, you know.
Yeah, he represents all, I mean, those are the new people.
Have you tried to get an interview with Haven O'Moar?
I've been waiting to ask you about him.
I'll just check this out.
All I know about him is more social.
We're talking about Haven O'Moar.
Everybody has met Haven O'Moar socially.
Everybody.
Bill Scheide had dinner with him.
And I said, do you remember how this got together?
He thought it was through plumbing, you know, because I guess he bought a lot of stuff from plumbing.
Ricky Jay, the magician.
I did an interview with Ricky Jay.
As you can see, you've talked to just about everybody.
No, I've talked to Nick Barker.
I've talked to, I mean, it's going to be a nice book.
And I write, if I may say so, good interesting stories.
Let's talk about Haven O'Moore.
Everybody's got a Haven O'Moore story.
acquire things for him at all?
I had no business connection.
It was just a very funny thing that when I first met Haven O'Moore, I didn't know what he looked like.
And I was at a wedding reception, and the person who was getting married, the groom said to me that Haven O'Moore was going to be there.
He wanted to introduce the two of us.
Did you know who he was prior to that?
I just knew he was a coming collector.
And it was Arthur Freeman's wedding, Arthur Freeman at Quaritch.
I'm seeing him in two years.
Funny thing was, at this wedding... What a small world.
I don't know anybody.
Even when was it Arthur Freeman's wedding?
Yeah.
When married Janet Ingram, who was former... No, this is one of the... at least one marriage back.
Arthur's been around a bit.
And it was at a reception after they got married.
And I was talking to this couple, and I can't remember what we were talking about.
Skiing and all kinds of different things.
And Arthur comes over and he says,
Oh, Haven, I'm so glad that you met Ken.
And it was like suddenly Haven of More changed totally.
It was really funny.
I wasn't this anonymous person anymore.
But how many changed?
Well, he was much more cautious.
More cautious when he knew who you were?
Yeah.
What was he like prior?
I think we were talking about skiing and talking about various... You talked about skiing?
You know, it was just a real interesting, you know, outgoing kind of guy.
I mean, are you familiar at all with the Institute of Traditional Science and all that stuff?
You've never heard of that before?
No.
What he was going to build in Cambridge?
No, I didn't know any of that kind of stuff.
Did you know that he had a partner by the name of Michael Davis?
Well, I mean, yeah, I knew it after the fact.
After the fact.
Nobody knew he had a partner before the fact.
I knew nothing about him.
I heard the story, and I don't remember who told me, that somebody who knew him well said to him that someone had done a background check on him and that he had no background.
True.
I'm as good a detective as anybody is.
Go ahead.
And he said, don't you understand my name?
Have no more.
He said that?
Yeah.
It's the title of my chapter, by the way.
Have no more.
Beautiful, isn't it?
I don't know who told me that.
It could have been Arthur Freeman.
He has no history.
He comes to us full-blown out of the 1950s.
Did you read the Sotheby's catalog?
Not really.
I heard that it was off the wall.
Take some time, sometime, and read it.
And not just the thing at the front, but the biographical blurb at the back, with a bust of himself, as he produced.
And he claims kinship with the famous Celtic king, Avon O'Moore, of the ninth century.
He claims kinship with Sir Thomas More,
and Stonewall Jackson, but he never tells you where he was born.
I don't know where he was born.
I don't know if or where he went to school.
People suggest CIA connections, new identity, but that he comes to us full-blown out of the 1950s.
That's the fact that Jackson had no history as far as I can see.
I don't need all this.
When I met him, what struck me was, I mean, he was just a guy that you run into at a reception,
And you're talking, you know, and I can't remember, we were talking about health foods and all different kinds of stuff.
He was relaxed.
Was he interested in health foods?
Yeah.
Did you know anything he was saying about yoga and stuff like that?
No.
If he did, I didn't pay any attention.
It didn't mean anything to me.
But he was very relaxed.
And then the minute Arthur said, well, this is Ken Rendell, you know, it just took on a whole different thing.
I mean, he was more formal.
Where was this wedding?
The wedding was, I don't know where the wedding was.
This was a reception in Boston.
It was in Boston.
Yeah.
Okay.
At Arthur's mother's house in Belmont, actually.
Did he mention anything about his villa in Acapulco?
I don't remember.
Frankly, I never liked him.
We were at a reception, and he outrageously chased my wife around and really pissed me.
Haven did?
Yeah.
And, I mean, apparently, I mean, there was a wife sitting there.
Did you meet Lorea, his wife?
Yeah.
Nice woman.
Did you know he wrote poetry?
I don't really know an awful lot about it, guys.
Have you talked to Priscilla Jubeles?
Yeah.
We were at a dinner party at Priscilla's one night.
They went out with him socially, actually.
Yeah, I know.
And we didn't know that Haven and his wife were coming to dinner.
You had dinner at Priscilla's house?
Yeah.
And I said Priscilla, I said, if I knew that Haven was coming, I wouldn't have come.
No kidding.
And that's why he just gets drunk and he gets obnoxious.
He does get drunk.
Did you know he was going to build this great library in Cambridge?
No, I didn't know anything about him.
Shut this up.
I just didn't know anything about him.
We had high spots.
Extraordinary stuff, though.
Yeah.
Not really looking for stuff that is my kind of stuff.
Did he ever ask you if you had anything that might be interesting?
No, he asked me to look at a book that was annotated by Thomas Jefferson one time.
Did you go to his house?
I can't remember.
No, it didn't go to his house.
I can't remember whether he brought it by.
He never let people in his house.
Did you know that?
I heard that kind of thing, the people who showed up there.
Brattle Street, was it?
Actually, from Krause.
when they were delivering the Shakespeare's.
The guy, they really wanted to see what he had.
And he knocked the door and he asked if he could use the men's room.
And the guy said, there's a gas station around the corner.
Somebody else, who I won't name because you know him, was in the house.
I said, there's no furniture in there.
No furniture to sit down.
Because I said, there's more people in there.
The books were never kept there.
They were kept in bank vaults, two bank vaults in Boston.
Yeah, no, because I had a bank vault there, too.
And it shook up the deal one time when I said, gee, that was a nice sale you made to Haven.
And I was like, what?
I mean, you're supposed to really be kept quiet.
God damn it.
You know, he must have been drunk and told you about this.
And I just let it go just for a few minutes.
I said, no, no.
I said, listen.
I said, I'm in the same bank he's in.
I said, and they wheeled all these crates.
Yeah.
What bank was your name?
Boston Bank.
Yeah.
Safety Department.
What is it?
Is it like a big loan?
Yeah.
Well, I mean, what you have are, his stuff is frequently just left in crates.
But it's a big room with a lot of safes in it, vaults, and you can rent individual vaults inside of it, inside their main vault.
Did you know there was a big lawsuit in Cambridge that went on between he and Davis?
Yeah.
Yeah, because the attorneys called and asked if I'd be interested in doing an appraiser.
I mean, I had to say I couldn't appraise books.
I'm not in the book business.
Which side?
Is it Davis' side?
Yeah.
Which is Hale and Boer.
They've impounded the case.
I asked to see it, and the judge wouldn't let me see it.
She had it in her office.
I said, well, come on, it's a public record.
And she wouldn't let it, and I wrote to her superior.
It's a very interesting story that's going on.
This could be my New Yorker song, I think, by the way.
Then, meanwhile, I copied the docket.
I went back on it.
How does that sound, by the way?
That chapter.
Oh, yes, that's fascinating.
But Arthur may know more about him.
We will.
I'm going to see also Colin Franklin.
Yeah, but I think Arthur really knows.
I'll have to call Arthur.
This is Friday.
Shit.
You better, and I'll tell you with Arthur, plan on two or three... Hours?
...times.
Arthur can... He's never frowned in the morning.
You've seen him in London.
I'm seeing him in London, but Dick Manning told me he's coming for the Martin sale, and Dick buys a lot of stuff, and he said, we'll have dinner together.
So I know that if I only get him late, if I only get an hour or so out of him in London, I'm going to get him when he comes to New York.
What we just try to do is kind of get him in front of him late in the day, go to a bar.
Late in the day at Forge.
Yeah.
I understand he's a big Red Sox fan.
Oh, yeah.
It's a brand new book.
Maybe I'll just bring it as a present.
This guy is a Red Sox fan on the scale that he will call Arthur Birchbaum
Arthur, I've interviewed by Larry.
And ask Arthur to put the phone down by the radio so that he can sit in his office in London and listen to the whole game.
Who's paying the merch?
That's a great story.
I had dinner with Arthur in Charlotte, and I was in their library, and he took out this book and put it in my lap.
Gorgeous, illuminated, book of hours.
And he said, yeah, it's beautiful, but that's not, he said, look at the inscription.
There was an inscribed book from Henry VIII.
Are you familiar with this book that he has?
To Margaret Pole, I guess, who later was beheaded or something.
You know, and you've seen Breslauer?
No, yeah.
Breslauer is important to see.
Who's Breslauer?
I don't even know who Breslauer is.
Oh, Bernard Breslauer is a guy you absolutely don't want to miss here.
He lived right across from the Metropolitan Museum in New York.
How do you spell his name?
B-R-E-S-L-A-U-E-R.
B-R-E-S?
Yeah.
B-R-E-S.
L-A-U-E-R.
Uh-huh.
New York collector.
No, a dealer.
New York dealer.
Okay.
Extraordinary dealer.
Okay, I think Arthur mentioned him to me.
Yeah, you should absolutely see him.
Arthur has a lot of interesting Haven O'Moy stories.
Yeah.
Didn't know much about him.
Everybody's got Haven O'Moy stories.
But I mean, as a general thing, Breslauer in terms of, I mean, I wouldn't say, I don't in any way mean Breslauer's passe now, but he's getting old.
But Breslauer was a very fine dealer.
He's got a lot of the really important people.
I'm going down.
I have to do Rustenburg and Stern.
They've been around.
Interesting.
I've interviewed Leonard Baskin and his wife.
Do you know their collection at all?
She's collecting something that really hasn't been collected.
I mean, there's some of those feminists.
I think an important point to all of this is are the different kinds of collectors.
Like Baskin's wife doing that kind of thing, to me, is the real... It is one type.
I'm not going to say pure collector, because pure collector is the one filling in a stamp album, collecting it for the sake of collecting it.
But the people who read it, the people that you can discuss it with,
That's what I enjoy the most.
I should let you read the transcript of that interview I did with him one afternoon.
It's amazing, because one will start a sentence, and the other will finish it as a complete sentence.
They know exactly what they're talking about, and it comes out of the woodwork.
And the sentence will just, it just took me hours to transcribe it.
But to see people who know what they have, this is what you see after all.
Bill Shady knows his stuff.
He doesn't have to go in.
look up where such and such a thing is.
You know your stuff.
I mean, these people know their stuff.
I've been interested if Dick Manning knows his stuff.
Carter Burden, I don't even think he knows who he collects.
He's got 90,000 books, 7,000 authors that he's acquired in the last 10 years.
You think he could name 500 of his authors?
I'd be amazed.
Not the way he's bought.
And he's selling, too.
Have you dealt with him at all?
No.
You know him?
I know him, but he doesn't buy manuscript material.
Is he?
Do you think I'm going to have a terrible title to him?
I haven't approached him yet.
I have no idea.
Priscilla knows him really well.
I haven't been with Priscilla next time.
Okay.
Well, and Priscilla has lunch with him, or was having lunch with him frequently.
Really?
Yeah.
She'll help you then.
What about Koch?
Who's Koch?
Fred Koch.
I don't know.
He's the other big weirdo of the modern day.
Fred?
With a K?
K-O-C-H.
And where's Fred out of?
Every place.
I mean every place.
He's bought Getty's house in London, down in Surrey.
He's got a house in Monaco.
He's got a big apartment on Fifth Avenue.
Where did he collect?
It's been all over the place.
His stuff is mostly coming up for sale.
He's been this wild man buyer, spending tens of millions, and not books, manuscripts.
He's been a major buyer of musical manuscripts.
which he is apparently giving to the Morgan Library.
He bought some major, major stuff from Priscilla, in mindings.
She mentioned it to me.
He collected homosexual literature in terms of Cocteau and Oscar Wilde, and created prices.
Crazy.
But why did he collect the homosexual stuff?
I don't know.
It's all coming up for sale again.
I mean, it is.
Oh, he's raving.
Okay.
You notice how I pursued my question?
I mean, everybody wondered, were AIDS or chains going to get to him first, you know?
AIDS or what?
Chains.
How old is he?
Forties.
Really?
He's part of the Koch family of Kansas that had this huge split.
I mean, he's a real identifiable character.
You look in the books 400, he's written up in there.
He and his brother, I live in Dover, and his brother lived in Dover, Bill Koch.
And the two of them sued the family and got like $800 million of fees.
Jesus Christ.
Settlement from their brothers.
What was the source of the fortune?
Oil and gas in Kansas.
In Kansas.
I mean, it's a real identifiable.
It's coming up for sale where?
At Christie's, June 7th and 8th.
Is he breaking up the whole collection?
I don't know.
Christie's June 7th and 8th.
Yep.
So there's no catalog yet.
No.
I will call him today, however.
I mean, he's a guy who was putting together on a huge scale and then stopped, all of a sudden stopped.
And I don't know whether he's dumping everything or... That goes back to what I asked you earlier.
Why?
Why do people do this?
They become bored.
Maybe he has AIDS.
I mean, I don't want to spend the records like that.
I just don't know, because we sold a lot of material to him, but I never had a sense of the man.
But Priscilla certainly knew.
Priscilla will know how to get in touch with him.
Oh, yeah.
Well, we can give you his address and so on, but Priscilla, you need an introduction, and Priscilla would be the one.
She's wonderful.
Yeah.
And Dan.
Dan's in my book.
He just barged his way into my book.
We had lunch in New York last week.
And she was supposed to come, but she couldn't make it.
And so I started interviewing Dan.
I said, this is a fascinating guy.
Dan is a real heavyweight.
Fascinating guy.
And he's got the right motivation that I like.
He's gone broke buying books.
He grew up knowing Lou Feldman, by the way.
Every rotten thing that Hamilton says about Feldman, you've got this guy who went in as a kid, 11 years old, and who Feldman took him aside and gave him things, and showed him the greatest of compassion and understanding, and, you know, so, I mean, I will balance this, and I will, from this, draw a profile.
And Feldman's not a major guy, but he is part of the Texas story to a very great extent.
Yeah, I mean, some of the stuff down at Texas stunk.
I mean, I don't mean to be, you know, painting it.
According to Ellen Dunlap, you were pretty critical about Texas there for a while.
Well, I came... You kind of pissed off, as a matter of fact, as the hero.
Well, it related more to Jenkins, and a lot of the other stuff that went on down there, on small scale.
Guy Jenkins.
Yeah, on small scale.
And I thought that... I really questioned the whole idea of, you know, using public money in such a crazy, cavalier way.
And also the whole thing with Roberts.
Calton Lake brought me down there to do some appraisals and to review a lot of stuff.
Calton became acting director when Roberts was talking about him two days ago.
And Calton brought me in as a total outsider.
Nobody could complain about whatever I found because I had no stake in anything down there.
And I think, you know, I just think there's a lot of real, real slipshod stuff going on.
When was that?
Well, Carlton was the interim guy.
Yeah.
So just before Deckard came on.
Yeah, I mean, I think that during the war, from what I saw during the Warren Roberts period, it was just a lot of real slipshod practices.
I can't, I mean, I wouldn't get in, I'm not going to ever get into speculating whether people got something out of these deals or not.
Ellen thinks that Warren got really screwed, that he was the victim of a political hatchet job.
She would know, I just... It was really Harry Ransom's deal, I mean, and...
Warren told me, for instance, how he's kind of met that, you know, he found the Hanley Key Collection, and of course, Harry always took credit for it.
And he says, you see, this is such a machine.
I wrote that.
Harry Ransom didn't write that.
Well, he was kind of doing these desacto things, I guess, and not getting any credit, and then he got kicked out, or whatever happened.
But what did you think?
Hamilton says, go look and see some of this stuff.
He says, tell me if you've ever heard of any of these writers before.
He says, you have total unknowns, people who have never published anything.
They put a price on their papers, and they sell them to Feldman, who in turn sells them to Texas.
And this is what he says.
Can you name me some of these authors?
No, he says, you just go down and look at the file.
Again, he's making charges without backing it up.
He doesn't have the...
He could be accurate.
Give me a name.
See, that was the whole thing in the Hitler Diaries, that he told a reporter from Newsweek that they were fake.
And the guy said, well, don't you want to see a photocopy?
He said, I don't need to see a photocopy to know they're fake.
And the guy said, well, how the hell can you know they're fake?
There's no chance as how they are.
Well, see, that's ridiculous.
Who needs an expert at $5,000 an hour?
I mean, it's crazy.
It's that shoot from the hip.
You really have to beware with him.
Well, I sensed that the other day because he was telling me things about it.
I just came back from Texas.
I saw this place.
There must be.
All right, so they've got locks of hair.
Listen, Harvard has locks of hair.
The Athenaeum has a book bound in human skin.
The Antiquarian Society had a desiccated Indian mummy that they've... You know, everybody... University College London has Jeremy Bentham.
The whole guy.
Sits in the library.
Is that right?
Yeah, it's true.
You look him up in Dictionary National Biography, it says he left all this money at the University College London Library, but he has to attend all the trustee meetings, and he's stuffed.
So really, it's a great story.
Do you think I can see him?
Oh, yeah, no problem.
The key thing is to ask him where the head is.
He took his head off, and he's got a wax head now, and his head's kept in a box.
Yeah, isn't that bizarre?
Yeah.
When the Brits turn around, they say, well, Texas has the socks that, yeah, we gotta go.
It's crazy.
It looks like an outhouse.
And this is University College London, right?
Yeah, University College London.
I'm going to be there in two weeks.
Yeah, I mean, and that's right in the middle of London.
It's near the British Museum.
Well, that's where I'm going to be doing a lot of work.
But for an absolute wacko story.
That's a great story.
And, of course, I'm sure they were appalled by it, but if they don't do it, they lose, right?
Yeah.
Just like if Peeps's library, if they don't do it exactly the way he wants it, it goes to the other college.
Jeremy Bentham's body?
Do you think he did this as a joke?
I'm trying to find it.
I'm pretty sure that it's written up in here as to, uh... What's the book you're looking up there?
Dictionary of National Biography.
Well, that's of England, right?
Yeah.
Yeah, the National Biography is the English one.
American is August American.
I'll check that out at Harvard.
Yeah, I'm going to get out of here in a moment.
I've seen the body.
Don't waste time on it.
I'll find it.
I thought it was right at the end here.
I'll get a photocopy of this if I find it quickly.
I'm going to shut this off, okay?
Can I come back again?
Definitely.
You're doing a really good job with this.
I'm very interested.
Does it sound like I'm on track of some interesting things?
I think it is.
I'm very interested in helping you out any way I can.
Thank you.
I think it's called J.A.
Farrar.
It's a book we have around here.
I think I might even have it.
About literary forgeries?
Yeah, about literary forgeries.
I have access to tons of books.
I'm doing all my research at Harvard, so.
It's not, you know, forgeries that are not like a George Washington, but where people are forging things for the text, William Henry Island forging shapes.
Like CJ Wise and stuff like that.
Yeah.
But, well, that's, you know, more of a collecting kind of thing, but where the literary text is what is really the object of the scam.
I think I know the book.
At some point, I'll give you, I've just corrected a chapter of a book that I'm doing on forgeries that has all of this kind of stuff in it, how over the years the role that forgeries have played, literary forgeries have played, influencing history.
So you're doing your research on this?
Oh, yeah.
Yeah, this book is up to almost just photographs now.
We've just got to get the photographs.
Where are you publishing it?
I haven't looked around at all.
I may just do it myself.
I'm doing it to distribute it myself.
I want a book out to show people how you authenticate material.
There's not a guessing game.
It has nothing at all to do with just instinct, because instinct, in these cases, is really based upon things you're actually observing.
You know, people say this doesn't feel like.
Well, they're looking at a color of an ink.
They're looking at texture.
And you can illustrate all of this.
Who do you suggest I see in London, by the way?
Any names?
Have you heard of Roy Davids?
No.
He's probably very hard to see, but you're certainly welcome to say that I suggested that he take a few minutes and talk to you.
He's the head of rare books and manuscripts at Sotheby's.
But he's also... And make good contacts at Sotheby's in New York, too.
He's also an awful lot more than that.
He runs a whole series of divisions at Sotheby's.
It's very strange, because he's the expert in charge of rare books and manuscripts.
He's head of the department.
He is one of the senior vice presidents with a whole group.
I mean, everything like jewelry and all kinds of stuff.
He's also the head of the marketing division.
So he's way up, and so Roy is very hard to get a hold of.
I have access to John Marion.
I'll have Marion to be an introduction.
He's the head of selfies in New York, of course.
And David Redden, who does not get along with Roy.
Is that right?
Yeah.
No, he's kind of junior to Roy, and they don't have too much...
Yeah, you would not want any recommendation coming from Redwood.
Call the secretary.
His name is Julie.
Julie?
She's in London, right?
And just say that you've talked to me and that I suggested that if Roy could just get a few minutes to talk to you.
I might do it on the fly, like while I'm there.
I'm here for a couple days.
Instead of setting it up, that gives them time to turn you down.
I have all these strategies, by the way, and they all work.
Tell Julie that I said that it was worth Roy's time to have a drink with you.
And then I think Denny is going to work on with you.
Okay.
It's worth Roy's time.
This is great.
I'm going to let you go because you don't get that point.
I will get them to get a copy of this.
I'm going to shut off that machine.
Wow, it's horrific.